Hi everyone, welcome to Mac OS X and
Scientific Computing.
I'm Bud Tribble, Vice President of
Software Technology for Apple.
And I've got a lot of great
stuff to go over today.
I'm going to be talking
about Mac OS X and
Scientific Computing in general,
but we've also got sort of
the meat of this presentation,
which are some great demos from some
third parties that I'm sure you'll enjoy.
To get started,
it's been a year since I was
up here last talking about
Mac OS X and Scientific Computing
and pointing out some of the
momentum that we were starting to
see in the science market with Mac.
And I'm pleased to report that that
momentum has not only continued,
but it's on an accelerating course.
And I'd just like to take a few
moments to highlight a few things here.
First thing, in August of 2004,
we introduced our iMac,
17-inch and 20-inch.
Now, why is this interesting for science?
Well, any of you who have done any bench
science know that you like to
have your computer on the bench,
but bench space is sort of at a premium.
And so it's been pointed out
many times to me as I've wandered
around and talked to various labs.
And I've been told that this is a great
machine for bench science because it sort
of sits up there on its aluminum stand.
You can shove the keyboard under it.
Someone pointed out to me
that it was sort of impervious
to spills on the bench.
And I mentioned, well,
that sort of depends on exactly
what is spilling on the bench.
But this is a great
machine for the scientists.
XServe, RAID,
I'll come back to this subject.
More and more science
is about big storage.
And Apple originally got
into the storage business.
Part of our market is the
high-end media market.
Those guys eat terabytes for breakfast.
But this is more and more
the story of science.
The ability to either collect data,
store it, data that is generated
during simulations,
data that has to be analyzed.
Almost any lab you walk into these days,
there's a need for big storage.
And if you look around
the market and say,
well, what's the most
cost-effective way to do that?
It turns out XServe RAID is there.
It's a bit between $2 and $3 per gigabyte
of fully rated storage with XServe.
Fiber optic connectivity
in a nice 3U mount system,
you can get 5.6 terabytes.
So it's the kind of thing
that no lab should be without.
If you're not generating
terabytes of data,
you're probably not doing
real science these days.
Just a couple other things to point out.
[Transcript missing]
Portability.
So, Apple obviously has always had a
great lineup of portable computers.
I can't tell you the number of scientists
that have come up to me and said,
you know, it's just so great that I can
have Xsers in my lab or clusters
or grids in my lab running my
simulations or running my analysis.
But, you know,
if I'm on a plane to a conference,
I just take my PowerBook with me.
And it's exactly the same environment.
That is such a productivity boost
for anyone involved in research.
And with the PowerBook G4
introduced in 2005,
you've got 1.67 gigahertz.
It gets slightly warm, but that's okay.
and then a key product launch
happened in February 2005,
BioTrue.
BioTrue is a collaborative
system for sharing data,
very useful in the biosciences.
Continuing on, BioIT World,
we got the cover of BioIT World.
And as you probably know,
BioIT or Biotech is one of the first
places where Apple really got a strong
foothold starting a couple years ago.
And we got our foot in the door, that is,
the door is now wide open.
And I don't know if
you'd call us dominant,
but certainly it's hard to
go into a bio information lab
without seeing Macs around,
without seeing Macs used for analysis,
for genetic analysis,
biochemical modeling, etc.
Continuing in that vein,
what we're starting to see this year,
March 2005,
we were at the American Chemical Society.
What this represents is
Apple moving into other parts of
the pipeline for drug development.
So we sort of started in the
genetics part of that pipeline,
genetic modeling and some
of the biochemical modeling.
American Chemical Society represents
a different part of that pipeline and
we're coming on extremely strong in that
area and I expect that trend to continue.
Again,
more products launched in April 2005,
molecular imaging from Kodak.
Just a little bit more
information about that.
We're starting to see a
lot of new applications,
I'd like to mention a few of them, SAS,
drug development.
So what we're seeing here
is building momentum.
Last time I was here,
I spent a lot of time talking about
all the open source applications
that were available for Mac OS X.
That continues to be the case,
but the big news over this last
year is that we have penetrated
this market enough to the point
where the commercial applications
are moving over in large numbers.
So that's just really exciting for us.
On April of 2005, of course,
the Power Mac G5, 2.7 GHz,
for any real number crunching,
this is a must.
With the AlteVec and the
acceleration libraries,
any sort of simulation or analysis
that involves floating point or
double precision floating point,
this is probably the top
system that you can get today.
[Transcript missing]
This one I won't spend too much
time on because this is one of
the examples we're going to see,
but June 2005 we saw Wolfram
Mathematica launch with 64-bit.
You're going to see that here
today and in some great detail.
And the last thing I want to
mention is macresearch.org.
So this is a great website if you're
using Macs at all in science and want
to get hooked in with the community and
find out what other people are doing
and find out hints on how to make things
work or what applications are available.
Macresearch.org is a
great resource for that.
Just a quote that I think is really
reflective of the current situation
with respect to Mac OS X and science.
This is from Mario Rotorer
of Stanford University.
"In research life sciences,
probably 50 to 70 percent of
research laboratories use Macs.
It's by far the most common
analysis platform." This is amazing.
I mean, five years ago,
if you had said this to someone,
they would have thought you were crazy.
This is absolutely the case now.
Mac OS X is the platform that
scientists love to use in computing.
We're showing up first in life sciences,
but I expect this trend to
continue throughout chemistry,
physics, etc.
Now to the fun part,
I'd like to start out by introducing Dr.
Osman Rattib.
Dr.
Rattib is professor of medicine and
vice chair of information systems
at the Department of Radiology UCLA.
He's a board-certified cardiologist and
radiologist who obtained his medical
degrees at the University of Geneva,
degrees in biophysics,
and a PhD in medical imaging from
the University of California,
Los Angeles.
He's responsible for coordinating
the development of enterprise-wide
strategy and infrastructure for
image management and communication.
His clinical activities
include cardiovascular,
MR, and CT imaging procedures,
combined PET/CT imaging,
and advanced cardiovascular imaging.
And I'm going to ask him to
come up and show you some of the
very exciting stuff he's doing.
So, Dr.
Rattib, welcome.
Thank you very much, Bud.
Good afternoon.
Yeah, my name is Asmar Lateef,
and as you heard,
I have a lot of responsibility at UCLA,
and we are very excited to be here.
I would like to first thank Apple for
giving us the opportunity to share
with you a very exciting project
that we had for about a year,
a year and a half now,
in developing what we think is
a killer application in open
source and medical imaging.
And thanks to OS X and Tiger now,
we were able to make that application,
really, a very high level, very exciting.
And thanks to all the features that
we were able to put in our software,
it became really very popular.
So let's start with a big, small,
or just an introduction of our software.
In a few words,
it's just a 3D viewer of medical imaging.
We call it a 3D, 4D,
and 5D because now medical imaging
comes into very large data sets that
are acquired in three dimensions
and can be acquired over time.
That makes you a fourth dimension.
And you heard about now
things like molecular imaging,
functional imaging,
which add more and more
data to the data set.
And we're going to talk
about that in a little bit.
So let's get started.
So the software is a software that
is designed to provide the tools
that are necessary to visualize,
manipulate, and interpret those images.
We intended to make it open
source so we can benefit from
a large community of academic
people that will contribute to it.
And it became very popular,
as I will explain to
you in a few minutes,
where people have now joined our
group and developed other part of the
software and are contributing to it.
It is developed by physicians.
I'm a cardiologist and a
radiologist by background.
And I'm here with Antoine Rosset,
who is here with me.
He's a radiologist,
a board-certified radiologist
from the University of Geneva.
And he spent one year with me
at UCLA as a research fellow.
And again, his clinical background helped
him develop that platform
designed for clinicians.
And I must say about five or six
other physicians have now joined
from different universities,
have joined our group in open source,
and have contributed with very
clinical-oriented application
or extension of the software.
It is already used by thousands of users.
And it's a very good software.
We've done a survey
in December last year,
which brought back about
2,000 responses of people that
are actually actively using.
We have 10,000s of downloads,
but I would say probably now we estimate
about 6,000 active centers in the world
that are using that software for either
clinical or research applications.
It is really intended to meet very
high-end demand and performance,
because it is for the new
generation of medical imaging
coming from scanner like CT scanner,
MRI scanner, ultrasound scanner.
And it is really intended to meet
very high-end demand and performance,
because it is for the new
generation of medical imaging
coming from scanner like CT scanner,
MRI scanner, and so on.
These machines nowadays generate
huge amount of data that are
very hard to handle if you don't
have access to very high-end,
very expensive workstations.
And we wanted to fill the gap to provide
a tool that will provide other users
that don't have access to these high-end
machines with something that they can
use on their laptop or on their own
computer to visualize those images.
And it is intended really
as a collaboration tool.
It's very important in medicine.
We know that one of the difficulty
we have is to convey information
from one physician to another.
And we think that will help us.
That software will help us.
And we have a lot of data
that we can use to do that.
And the software will help us to do that.
The The challenges are
multiple in medicine,
especially in medical imaging,
because we are now faced with huge
amount of information that we have
to deal with for every patient.
Every patient gets a lot of images,
a lot of studies.
And we are, as physicians,
we have to go through a lot of
effort in trying to interpret,
review, analyze those data.
We also have a problem, as I mentioned,
communicating with other physicians,
because we're dealing with a lot of data,
a lot of complex data
that we have to share.
And it's sometimes not very easy
in the usual environment that we
currently have in our institution.
Performance is very important.
And advanced processing tools are
required to process those data.
You will see that in the demo.
And it's very critical to have the
performance and the speed to create
things like dynamic 3D visualization,
rendering, sculpting,
and we'll show you that in a minute.
But most importantly,
I think we are under heavy
pressure in healthcare today
to have very high performance,
very high throughput.
So we want to make it
easy for the users to do.
We don't want users to be IT specialists
to be able to use the workstation.
So that's where the Mac comes in.
That's where the OS X user interface.
That's where all the consumer market
tools that we integrate in our software
makes life very easy for physicians,
that they can be very high performance,
focus on what they do best,
which is diagnostic clinical
diagnosis and clinical decisions
and don't have to learn all the
complexity of the software behind it.
So based on that,
we actually incorporated in our
software as much as we can from the
existing tools that are provided
in Tiger and OS X in general.
For performance, of course,
we use things like Altevec
and Quartz and other tools.
OpenGL was very useful to do
very rapid image manipulations.
Things like QuickTime 3D allows
us to generate 3D VR object
that can be exported and
sent to referring physicians.
Communication was a key here.
So we integrated things like email.
We integrated things like
exporting things to a iDisc so
that physicians can use it as a
storage media to store their data.
I know physicians that are using
it for being on call at home.
They have their technologists
upload the images to their iDisc
and they can download it and
just review it using OSIRIS.
We incorporated iChat.
We'll demo that in a minute.
We incorporated things like
being able to export to your iPod
and carry your data with you.
40 gigabytes in your pocket is pretty
good for carrying several studies
that you can't put on a CD or a DVD.
And of course,
we integrated things like XGrid
because performance is key here
to be able to expand and be able
to process and analyze very,
very large sets of data.
So I think the best is to move
on to the demo that Antoine
is going to be giving here.
And we'll show you some of the
features that this software does.
Of course,
these are some of the components,
open source component we have.
Starting in the software,
we'll give you a database browser
of the patient list and data list
that we have on the disc right now.
Every patient can have multiple study.
Every study can have multiple images.
And these are hundreds and thousands
of images for each patient.
In order to show these
series or sets of images,
we have thumbnails that actually
dynamically browse very rapidly
through those images so you can rapidly
see which set you want to look at.
And you have a preview on
the lower corner that shows
you a larger view of that.
So the icons and the lower corner
allows the user to browse through a
very large set of data very quickly.
Then the next step is
to open those images.
And you can open multiple sets
together at the same time.
So here,
Antoine is going to show you two sets
of data from different modalities that
were acquired in the same patient.
The one in color is actually a PET.
It's a functional metabolic image.
And the one in black
and white is a CAT scan,
a CT scan.
These two sets are acquired
in the same orientation,
so they can be fused together.
And that's what we do more
and more now in medicine.
We combine information
from different studies.
To make it simple, we just drag and drop
one set over the other.
It can be anything over anything,
and the physician will decide
what he wants to overlay.
And now we have both sets put
together and overlaid together.
So now we can see that the hot
spot on the left is the tumor.
And that's where the activity
of the tracer has been.
But you can also see the anatomy
behind it and see what part of the
bone are being involved and so forth.
And most importantly,
one thing we wanted to have is that
everything we do on that software can be
easily communicated to other physicians.
You can export that by email,
but you can also start an iChat session.
If you don't have the tool,
this is just to show you that
the software can be customized.
So there's a lot of tools that
don't have necessarily to be there.
You can just drag and drop
them when you need it.
So every user can have his
own customized environment.
Starting an iChat session here,
Antoine is going to start a session.
He's going to call me on a laptop.
So pretend I'm here thousands
of miles away from Antoine,
who's just here.
And he's going to call me
to try to show me an image.
And that's the beauty
of integrating iChat,
because it's a very simple tool to use.
He has me on his body list,
and he's calling me.
And then all I have to do is
just accept or don't accept.
If I'm busy, I just say no.
And now I'm here accepting the session.
And then I can see the results.
And as soon as we get that,
we'll be both together.
So he's going to be able
to show me the image.
Now I have on my screen what
he has in small on his screen.
And he can see me.
And we can, with the new iChat,
we can have three or four physicians
together conferencing over a case.
This is great.
I've been trying to do this for years,
where it was very specialized, dedicated,
proprietary tools that
were very expensive.
Now with iChat,
we have this performance and
this facility practically free.
You can use high-speed
internet and use iChat.
And here you are.
You can do medical consultation remotely,
what we call teleradiology
or telemedicine.
And that, again,
this is using consumer market tools to
meet the demand of practice in medicine.
Well, the software was basically
designed for doing 3D and 4D.
So I'm going to show you
some of those features.
And again,
we use a lot of open source component.
That's the beauty of open source.
There's a lot of open source
software out there to do 3D and
3D rendering visualization tool.
So we use that.
And we integrated that into our software.
Images come in slices.
So basically,
that's what the raw data looks like.
These are just cross-sectional slices
over a part of the body from a CAT scan.
Now, the 3D rendering tool,
we have multiple of them.
We're going to show you
one or two of those.
We'll now allow to have a
different vision of that,
which is much more useful,
especially if you try to visualize
topology and orientation.
Of course, this is a heart.
Being a cardiologist,
I chose to start with a heart.
Here you can see the whole chest
pretty much rendered in 3D.
And these are rendered real-time.
This is nothing pre-calculated.
This is rendered on the fly.
Antoine is basically
moving it up and down.
And you see now we have the chest
and ribs in front of the heart.
So what he's going to do is he's
going to just sculpt this out.
He's going to do a little surgery.
Don't worry.
There's not going to be any bloods.
It's not going to be bloody.
It's just, you know,
like you do in Photoshop.
Just take a region of interest,
cut through the 3D volume,
and let the computer just recalculate
the rendering with that piece taken out.
So this is how easy it is for
physicians to go and process the data.
We want it to be very, very simple.
Now we took the ribs
and the chest wall off,
and we can see the heart.
We can see the coronary arteries.
We can zoom in and out.
We can change the contrast.
All these tools can be done in real time,
and it's very high performance.
If you're not in the heart and
you don't understand the heart,
well, we'll show you something
that you may understand.
Again,
here are the cross-sectional images.
Well, I'm not sure anybody will
really be able to pick up where
exactly we are in the body.
This looks like a piece
of head with eyes in it.
Well,
we go for the 3D rendered image and...
[Transcript missing]
And last but not least, it's open source,
free, so please join the group.
Anybody out there that has great
ideas about developing 3D or
developing any image processing tools,
please go on the website,
join the development team.
This is going to be a great
platform for developing new
applications for the future.
And we also provided a way to do
plug-ins for those who want to
keep their intellectual property.
They can also have binary plug-ins.
If you have the greatest segmentation or
rendering tool you want to put in there,
you can still protect it or even
sell it as a separate plugin.
Thank you very much.
I really want to thank Dr.
Ratib.
You're witnessing an incredible
revolution in medical imaging here.
I think it's great that it's open source.
I think it's great that it takes
advantage of all the things in Tiger.
I personally, and I'm sure Dr.
Ratib remembers, when I did my,
I'm originally a medical doctor,
when I did my training, you know,
just the medical images
associated with one patient,
which were at that time physical,
you know, chest X-rays and so forth,
just to carry them around.
These things were heavy.
These were big acetate things
with silver halide and there was,
you know, it was the intern's job
to carry them around.
Now they come through iChat and the
medical images associated with a
single patient would literally fill
this stage if they had to be physical.
So I think, I think this is an area,
again,
I'll come back to storage and storage
of images like these and manipulation
of them with high powered computing is
going to be the story of the future.
Next.
I'd like to introduce Rob Raga-Scofield.
He is the guy behind Mathematica
from Wolfram Research on the Mac.
He was hired out of college
to port Mathematica to,
at that time,
what was going to be the newly
introduced Mac OS X after Mac OS 9.
And he has been associated with that
project ever since at Wolfram Research.
So I'd like to ask Rob to come up here
and show us what's latest in Mathematica.
Thanks.
Can we have the slides, please?
Hi.
Thanks, Bud, and thanks, Apple,
for asking me here.
My name is Rob Breguet-Scofield,
and I'm the primary Mac OS X developer at
Wolfram Research working on Mathematica.
Today I'm going to talk a little bit
about some of the Mac OS X features
we utilize in Mathematica to
add value for our customers.
So first of all,
I'll just give a brief overview
of what Mathematica is,
in case you're not familiar with it.
At the most basic level,
it is a calculator.
It has symbolic, numeric,
and graphic visualization functions
completely integrated into one package.
Next, Mathematica is also a
programming language.
It allows for functional programming,
object-oriented, and more traditional
procedural styles of coding.
And then,
with the Mathematica user interface,
it has very extensive support for text,
graphics, and typeset formulas to
be completely integrated,
which makes it a very capable
technical word processor.
So, Mathematica began its life
on the Macintosh in 1988.
It had a great UI which
talked to a computation engine
that ran in the background.
This computation engine also ran
standalone on several UNIX platforms for
a number of years with no user interface.
Because of the more advanced
multitasking and memory management,
Mathematica generally ran better
on these UNIX platforms than
what it did on the Macintosh.
For a number of years this was the case,
until Mac OS X came along.
With the merger of the superior
Mac user interface with the
more advanced UNIX Core OS,
it really created the ideal
platform for Mathematica.
So some of the things that our customers
are trying to accomplish and some of
the challenges they face in doing so.
First of all,
Mathematica allows you to run
computations interactively.
So you can examine the results
at each step along the way.
This is very helpful, for example,
so you don't have to run a very
lengthy computation only to find
out at the end that there was an
error somewhere along the way.
The interactive environment
helps a lot with that.
Users want to utilize sophisticated
algorithms without having to
rewrite everything themselves,
reinventing the wheel.
So Mathematica includes what is the
most extensive set of algorithms of any
software package in existence today.
Users also want extreme performance,
and so if they have parallelizable tasks,
they would like for those tasks to be
distributed across a grid of computers.
So they complete much more quickly.
And our product, Grid Mathematica,
allows certain types of operations
to automatically be distributed.
So users want to explore their data.
They want to dig into it and they want
to transform it into something useful.
And so Mathematica has a really
good intuitive environment for that.
The interaction, interactivity is great
for that sort of thing.
And the advanced pattern matching
in the mathematical language is
very suitable for this type of task.
Users want to work with very
large sets of data and they want
to work with lots of different
sets of data at the same time.
So the 64-bit optimizations that
are included with Mathematica 5.2,
which is going to be
shipping in a few weeks,
allow users to break the 4-gigabyte
barrier and work with massive datasets.
And finally,
users want to visualize their data
so they're not just looking at the
screen full of raw numbers and text.
So Mathmatica includes extensive
2D and 3D plotting functions.
And then finally,
users want to publish their
results and make them look good.
So Mathematica's top notch
mathematical typesetting and numerous
export formats make it a breeze
to publish your results to the web,
to print, or to anything else.
So some of the technologies we take
advantage of in Mac OS X are shown here,
and I'm going to give demos
of some of these things.
As far as the--so we take advantage
of Apple's highly optimized linear
algebra libraries that are part of
VecLib to make sure that numerical
linear algebra is as fast as it can be.
We have a great native
Acqua user interface.
And I think the rest of the
things we're going to show,
so I'll just get to that.
And the first thing I want to
talk about is the 64-bit support
that's in Mathematica 5.2.
There are a couple areas
where 64-bit support provides
advantages over 32-bit computers,
and one example is arbitrary
precision mathematics.
This is--
Here we're calculating the digits of pi,
the first one million digits of pi,
and doing so on the 64-bit version
of Mathematica is nearly twice
as fast as what it is on the
32-bit version of Mathematica.
And I'm going to show that right now,
so can we cut to demo one,
demo machine one please?
Great, so this is Mathematica 5.1
running in 32-bit mode.
It's calculating the first
million digits of pi right now,
and we're just going to
see how long that takes.
And it's a little over nine seconds.
And we're going to run the exact
same computation on Mathematica
5.2 running in 64-bit mode,
and the result is going to
come back much more quickly,
just a little over five seconds.
So there's a tremendous performance
increase for the 64-bit version for
this particular type of operation.
The other advantage of 64-bit support is
being able to work with massive datasets
or other memory-intensive computations.
And this is something that I can't
do in real time because it takes
a couple hours to complete.
But this is a simulation of a
tsunami that is going to start
in the middle of the screen here.
And the unique property of tsunamis
is that the energy they carry,
moves along all the way down
to the bottom of the sea floor,
that means that variations
in the sea floor,
like these mountains in this example,
can cause disturbances all the
way back up to the surface.
And that is what this
simulation is modeling.
So when we run this on a 32-bit computer,
we had to actually back the resolution
off a little bit so that the simulation
could complete in the 4-gigabyte
address space of the application.
And as you can see,
there are some artifacts
that show up here.
And this isn't because
the calculation's wrong.
It's just because it's
run at a lower resolution,
which causes slight variations to
be kind of exaggerated at times.
So it obviously doesn't look correct.
So we can do better on a 64-bit system.
We increased the resolution and
we rerun the same simulation
using about 6 gigabytes of memory.
And as you can see,
all the artifacts disappear.
And we get pretty much
what we would expect.
So that is another advantage of
64-bit systems over 32-bit systems.
As you saw in the keynote the other day,
one of the features we're taking
advantage of in a future version
of Mathematica is OpenGL for
interactive 3D graphics.
You know, this is pretty neat,
but lots of applications
can do things like that.
But because Mathmatica is a
completely general system,
we handle
Very complicated things as well,
and lots of times more specialized
packages fail when they get more
complicated inputs such as this here.
So that is OpenGL.
Next is Java.
We have a Java connection technology
built into Mathematica called JLINK,
and on top of that we have
a package called GUI Kit,
which enables you to build
Java interfaces that basically utilize
Mathematica functionality from within it.
And what this is, is a
An interface that allows you
to plot different starting
points and adjust parameters,
and then it will solve numerically
differential equations based
on the parameters that you set.
And this is all written in Mathematica,
utilizing the Java environment.
And just a couple other quick things.
Mathematica includes with it a library
called MathLink and an API that
allows you to call into Mathematica
from external applications or call
external applications from Mathematica.
And so what we have here is
an external application that
is calling into Mathematica.
It's a simple automator plug-in
that will do one of two things.
It will either just evaluate some
text as part of an automator action.
The result of the action will be the
actual evaluated version of that text.
Or you can use it to basically
process the input text,
calling mathematical functions on it.
And so I'll run another example here.
And what this code here I have is going
to do is it basically capitalizes the
first letter of each of the words.
So that is calling into Mathematica.
And one more example of that,
just because it's interesting,
is that there's also a service
that we have that you can download
from our website that you can use
from any services-aware application
that allows you to basically
evaluate the text right in place.
And there's even a
keyboard shortcut for it.
So you can immediately
evaluate Mathematica commands
from any application to text,
or there's a version that will
create a graphic as a result.
And the one last thing I'll mention
here is we have a Spotlight plugin
that knows how to read our documents.
So you can quickly find text inside
of your Mathematica notebook files.
The spotlight will catch up with me.
So here are some of the Mathematica
files that include the pot3d command.
But it also, because we include different
types of metadata in our files,
you can actually do advanced searches
on different types of metadata.
So if you were working with a certain
file and you don't remember where
it is or what exactly it was doing,
but you just remember it
had a lot of graphics in it,
You can actually search for all
the notebook files that have,
for example,
more than 50 graphics in them.
So you can quickly find
what you're looking for.
And with that,
I will give it back to Bud.
Thanks, Rob.
Well,
I think that's a really great example,
as are these other examples,
of what you can do when you
take advantage of the unique
capabilities of Mac OS X,
and especially Mac OS X Tiger.
And I just want to stress one of them,
which is the Tsunami demo.
That is the perfect example
of how to take advantage of
the 64-bit address space,
because, as you probably know,
the front end of the application
is still running in 32 bits,
the Cocoa or the Carbon front end.
But the back end,
the computational back end,
where you're using the full 6 gigabytes,
so that you don't have those artifacts,
that runs on top of all of our
new 64-bit APIs that take 64-bit
pointers in Mac OS X Tiger.
So that's the canonical example
of the best way to take advantage
of that full address space.
And you see the advantage in
terms of those artifacts are gone,
because you can finally do that tsunami
simulation at high enough resolution.
Next, it's my pleasure to introduce Dr.
Dean Doudger of Doudger Research.
And Dr.
Doudger has a Ph.D.
in physics from UCLA,
where he created the very
first Mac cluster in 1998.
He's also the award-winning
author of Adam in a Box and
Fresnel Diffraction Explorer.
And this I didn't know,
he co-authored the original
award-winning Kai's Power Tools,
so that's pretty cool.
And today his pursuits
include computational physics,
particularly dynamics of complex
quantum systems and high-performance
computing and visualization.
So welcome and hand it over to you.
Thank you very much.
Well, thank you very much,
and thank you all for coming.
I'm very glad to see you all here today,
and thanks to the kind people at Apple to
be able to speak to you today about
Pooch and how you can use it to build
plug-and-play clusters on Mac OS X.
So like first to be able to jump into
this by describing what is Pooch is
that basically Pooch is a piece of
software that manages clusters and
constructs them out of Macintoshes that
are connected together over a network,
over any kind of TCP/IP network.
But one of the things that
it supports is essentially
supercomputer compatible calculations.
And so that you can take your
codes that you ran on your,
say you were intending to run or
you did run on your supercomputer,
say at the major supercomputing
centers across the country,
and instead run them on the Macintosh
or optimize or debug them there
and develop them there as well.
But one of the key features to
be able to enable that kind of
capability is that it supports MPI,
also called message passing interface.
This is,
Pooch was the first software to be able
to support MPI on Mac OS X back in 2001,
and it supports actually five
different MPI implementations now,
but also supports this kind of
supercomputing behavior such as queuing,
launching these kinds of parallel jobs,
keeping track of them,
keeping track of their CPU time,
and makes them accessible to
users so that you can make
the clusters plug and play,
and you can go ahead
and use your software,
use your application,
and go ahead and accomplish
your work as you need to.
The kinds of users that we
have are from all disciplines
such as physics and chemistry,
as well as mathematics, biology,
and across the board.
And we have a lot of customers
across all the different kinds of
customers such as in academia and
government and industry as well.
So, to give you an idea of
what we did to essentially
reinvent the cluster computer,
this is how we support
five different MPIs,
open source as well as commercial MPIs,
but we also dynamically manage the
cluster and we also use Bonjour as well
as Service Location Protocol to be able
to discover the nodes out on the cluster,
discover the computational resources
and make use of them on the fly.
It also supports a number of diagnostics
for development optimization so
you can make it run really well
on the Mac cluster or run that
much better on some other hardware,
so you can mix and match and actually
have the Mac cluster complement
some of the Big Iron if you don't
have a large system yourself.
So, the idea of this build is to be able
to bring high performance computing
to the mainstream user and do it in
a way that's completely independent
of any kind of shared storage or
remote command line login or mucking
around with any parts of the system.
So,
you can focus on getting your work done
and so that's really the point of this
is that it's the lowest barrier to answer
that we're familiar with to be able to
accomplish this kind of work and so it's
a result in the savings of time and money
for users like myself as well as for
everyone else that I know who uses Pooch.
So, and so, which is the whole point of
cluster computing in the first
place is to be able to provide
computational resources for users.
So, some of the challenges of high
performance computing clusters.
So,
one of the challenges of high performance
computing clusters is really is
meant for problems that are simply
too large to solve in one machine.
Either it simply takes too
long or you simply can't fit it
within the RAM in one machine.
But other cluster types,
previous cluster types are very fragile
and very hard to use because they
rely on being able to configure things
low level in the operating system
to being able and so requires a lot
of technical expertise to be able
to understand what to do and what
not to do when configuring and setting
up these kinds of low level features.
And so,
because the nature of the design of the
way these things are built is so complex,
it's really hard to get the right
kind of software that's able to do it.
things are put together to the
previous cluster types that the
users become responsible for solving
any kinds of incompatibilities
or any other bugs in the problem.
So one of the ways we try to solve
that is to be able to take advantage
of a lot of the things that are
in desktop computing to be able to
bridge the cluster to you as the user,
let's say.
So for example, we support MPI,
so we support the supercomputer,
the same calculations that you
would run on a supercomputer,
as well as we use Bonjour to be able
to discover dynamically the health and
status of the nodes out there on the
cluster so we can dynamically respond
to any problems that might occur,
as well as we provide, say,
AppleScript and Automator support to
be able to make it an easier way to
be able to launch jobs on the cluster,
as well as different kinds
of windows into the cluster,
such as Spotlight and Dashboard,
and other ways to be able
to access the cluster and
combine these things together.
So if you wanted to do it yourself,
you know, you know of various books to
be able to build clusters,
really our book would be called
"The Mac Cluster Recipe." You take
a bunch of Macs or XSERVs,
G4s or G5s,
get an Ethernet switch and some cables,
and the directions are simply to
connect the hardware together,
download Pooch,
and go ahead and install it.
And it literally takes
seconds per machine to be
able to install the software.
So what I'd like to be able to provide
for you today is a demonstration,
a quick demonstration, we hope.
So I'll switch to demo number three.
Let's see.
Let me just get that going.
Okay, so the first thing I'd like
to be able to give you,
to be able to show you,
to give you an idea of, say,
a numerically intensive application
that takes a little while and sort
of stresses out the processor,
but this is a Z to the
Z fourth iteration fractal,
a little different than
the Mandelbrot fractal,
that produces a nice, you know,
graphical result,
and it achieves about five
gigaflops on my one power book here,
1.5 gigahertz G4 in this case,
and so that's all well and good.
And if I wanted to make it go faster,
well, if I had a second processor,
it can make use of multitasking,
but what if I want to get
beyond a factor of two?
That's where you need
to get outside the box,
and that's where parallel
computing comes in.
That's where Pooch comes in.
So to be able to install Pooch,
this is how long it takes.
And there it is.
So that's how long it
takes to install Pooch,
and you do that on each
node that's available.
And so the way actually,
let's go into it this way.
I can use Spotlight actually to,
if I know that I queued up
some jobs a little while ago,
and I can have it,
we have a Spotlight plugin
that exposes the queuing system
inside Pooch to Spotlight,
so you can go ahead and search
for other jobs that are out there.
So I can pull up the,
what the nodes of the job that's there,
but let's edit this to be able to
do this particular application.
So I can remove that,
go ahead and drag in the fractal program,
and let's remove these
and select some nodes.
I can open up,
I can select some nodes and I can see,
oh, I've discovered a couple
of other machines here.
There's a couple more G5s
right behind the scenes here,
but I can see that they're
actually reporting up as busy here.
Oh, actually, let's have a look at what
kinds of processors they are.
I can see that dual processor G5s,
they have a, you know, 2.7 G5.
2.7 gigahertz.
And also,
they actually use this information to
be able to rate each one of these units.
But of course, the running is busy,
so I can actually see, gee, you know,
what is it running?
I can see, okay,
there's a running job there,
so I want to go ahead and like
say kill that job that was there,
and it goes ahead and so
as soon as I do a refresh,
I can go ahead and see the,
what's there to be able
to make use of the nodes.
So let me go ahead and, oh, yeah.
So it just takes a little
while to be able to,
you know, get the nodes.
So I can go ahead and, oh, yeah.
So it just takes a little
while to be able to,
you know, get the nodes.
So I can go ahead and, oh, yeah.
So it just takes a little
while to be able to,
you know, get the nodes.
So it just takes a little while to be
able to submit the data that's there.
Okay.
So I can see that it rates
each one of these nodes,
and I see that it gives the
G5s a pretty high rating,
so let me go ahead and select
some of those and bring those in.
Some of the other
features that you can add,
you can delay the launch
until some later time of day,
so, or say at a later time,
so you can use a colleague's machine
after she's gone home from work.
You can,
it supports five different MPIs as
well as grid type applications,
compute jobs and so forth.
But to be able to launch the job,
I just click on launch job.
So this copies the executable
out to the other machines.
You might have heard that that was
pooch barking to be able to tell
you that it launched correctly.
And so when it passes
control to the executable,
you can see that it
went quite a bit faster,
something like 26 giga-flops or so.
So, you know,
all this is all well and good,
but what if that wasn't enough?
So I can go ahead and pull in some more
nodes by essentially extending Bonjour.
What I can do is, you know,
I can go ahead and Say select,
let me see.
That's right,
select some machines over at UCLA.
So this is something like
300 or 400 miles away or so.
I can go ahead and pull in
some of the machines that are
there and make use of those.
So let's see what we can do.
I can see that we have
some G5s over there.
And to be able to get
through the firewall,
I need to use a particular port number.
Yeah, there we go.
And let's see.
So it's now actually
copying that executable.
Whoops.
It should be copying that
executable over to UCLA.
And...
One of the other things that
I can do here is actually sort
of an iTunes interface that I can
select the local network from
essentially our node playlist on
the left side of the interface.
And if I make use of that.
There we go.
It's now combining the nodes
that are here with the ones
at UCLA and asking the,
and so it's combining,
this is a 15-processor cluster
here that's distributed
over about 400 miles or so,
and I get something
like 88 gigaflops or so.
So this is substantially
more improvements.
And so my distance record right
now is like about from Munich,
Germany,
about 6,000 miles away back to UCLA,
combining these kinds of nodes together.
So just to be able to show you that this
not only works not just for fractals,
what I'll do is pull in a physics code.
Let's see,
actually let me give you an idea
of what this looks like when
we run just a single processor.
There you go.
So this is actually a million particles,
a million charged particles all
interacting electrostatically
and showing the electric
potential as a function of time.
And so it's from one frame to the
next frame to the next frame or so.
So this is roughly two-ish seconds
or so to be able to run this.
And we can see that it's running a
little bit slower than we'd like.
So let me go ahead and quit out of this.
So if I drag and drop that
into Pooch and go ahead and
select my little cluster here.
There we go.
Okay.
So actually the computations
are now being done on the
four processors that are here.
And so one, two, three, four.
So it's actually going, you know,
you can sort of roughly
about four times as fast.
And we can see that actually the
live message passing pattern is on
the lower right of the screen here.
It's showing the live message passing
pattern as it goes as a function of time,
as well as a histogram of
the number of messages being
sent and received as it goes.
So while that's running,
what I can also show you is one last
thing is the features in the automator.
Let's see,
so definitely a computationally intensive
thing to be able to take up what's here.
I can actually say use Automator to be
able to have the finder select some items
and then combine that with a number of
different pooch actions that are here.
So I can have it say
launch an executable,
like choose an executable let's say,
and say launch the executable on a four
node cluster as well as say on a single
task or get nodes of a pooch cluster.
In this case I'll choose distribute
single tasks onto a pooch cluster.
And if I run this,
I can go ahead and say select
a particular executable,
something simple,
and this is like Automator is
actually going ahead and submitting an
executable as single node tasks into
the pooch queuing system that pooch
will later launch on the local nodes
that are here after the other job runs.
hands.
So that completed the
queuing of the system.
Oh, and one other thing that's
also in here is that we also
feature a dashboard widget.
So we're actually able to have the
dashboard be a window into the cluster.
We can see that it shows the history
of the job activity as a function of
time over the last couple of days.
And it also shows the cluster capacity.
So actually,
it estimates that I'm using pretty
much all of the cluster capacity of
the local nodes that it finds here,
and also lists how many nodes
there are and some of the
current status of the cluster.
So with that,
that's the conclusion of the demo.
I wanted to thank you very
much for coming here today.
And thanks for your attention.
Thanks, Dean.
Well, I think one of the messages
there is that before Pooch
and before Pooch on Mac OS X,
Doing something like that in a lab would
probably require a programming staff,
a lot of time,
a lot of effort before you even began
to get to the science part of it.
And the beauty of something like Pooch on
Tiger is that that is all done for you.
You saw the Automator demo there.
Basically, you know,
grid computing with drag and drop.
It's an incredible boon
to scientists everywhere,
I think.
So, next I'd like to sort of
present to you a challenge.
And what I believe is that the
Mac platform really is a platform
that allows you to push the limits.
And I want to talk about what
those limits are and where you
should be pushing over really the
next 10 years on this platform.
The first is really big computing.
And we saw examples here.
It's computing that is
tackling very large problems,
problems that could not even
be thought about 10 years ago.
And it's taking advantage
of 64-bit computing,
not just in terms of the length of
integers and doubles and floating points,
but taking advantage of the fact that
with Tiger you can break through the
64-bit or break through the 4-gigabyte
barrier and have 64-bit pointers.
And with the Tsunami demo you saw
a perfect example of the kind of
breakthroughs you can get with that.
Really big computing also
means cluster computing.
It also means grid computing.
Both Mathematica and Pooch
are great examples of that.
And we put together in a few seconds
a grid that extended beyond the
walls of this room and could easily
extend around the globe with that
same simple drag and drop metaphor.
So there are problems that can be
tackled with really big computing that
are ideal in terms of the Mac platform.
Cluster computing, grid computing,
high-end numerical computing.
We put a lot of work in our
engineering group into making
sure that the libraries,
whether it's the Accelerate
libraries or the AlteVec libraries,
are available with simple
APIs so that you can write apps
that take advantage of that.
And our numerical team makes sure
it gets the right answer and we're
watching every single instruction cycle.
We're making sure that the cache
load lines are completely optimized.
So please take advantage of that.
There's lots of sessions here that
will go into a lot of detail on that.
So for any numerical intensive
scientific applications,
Mac has a lot to offer there.
Second big area,
and this really applies to any
area of scientific computing,
but we saw a perfect
example of it here with Dr.
Ratib and medical imaging.
And you know that in the early part of
this century we heard a lot about the
human genome and the genome project
and the online databases that have
genomes of human and other organisms.
Well, it turns out that medical imaging
and functional medical imaging,
the databases there completely dwarf
what the genetics guys are dealing with.
I mean these guys just have four
characters per codon to deal with,
and what we're talking about with
medical imaging are huge databases.
And as you get into simulation and
keeping the results of simulations
around and being able to compare
them and be able to share them
around the scientific community,
and visualize them, these are going to be
very important problems.
Now Apple is known for
our ability to visualize.
We have nice 30 inch displays that
I'm sure all of you have back at home.
This area is one where Apple spends
a lot of time making sure that things
are rendered properly on the screen.
We support OpenGL to the hilt
and will continue to do that.
We have Quartz Extreme for dealing
with image processing in real time.
So this is an area where Mac is
uniquely situated to really provide
a great contribution to science.
Humans are just not good at looking
at terabytes of numerical values.
You have to turn it into a visualization
if you're going to have it interpreted,
have it published,
have it actually contribute
to scientific breakthroughs.
[Transcript missing]
We have a lot of things going
on at the Developer Conference.
I want to point out a few of them.
First of all,
we've got the Science Connection
Room and a lot going on there.
That's room 3014.
And I believe, if I'm not mistaken,
there's going to be some discussion
there after the HPC presentation.
Science discussion is going on around,
well, HPC and Science is Wednesday,
Thursday.
Scientific and
Medical Imaging on Mac OS X.
We saw a little bit of that here today,
but there's going to
be a lot more in-depth.
On Friday, a Science Feedback Roundtable.
It's important to hear from
all of you and get feedback.
Apple Design Awards,
the Best Scientific Computing Solution.
There's going to be an award for that.
That should be interesting.
A BioCoCo Group Meeting, Wednesday,
6:30 p.m.
in the Science Connection Room.
Many sessions, many labs relevant to
creating great science apps.
And then you've all got your booklets.
There are a number of sessions
that I encourage you to attend
specifically for science.
Those of you who have been coming to
this developer conference for a while
have probably noticed the sort of
exponential growth curve we've been on.
That continues,
and it really is because Mac,
in my opinion,
is the best machine ever that's been
created for scientific productivity.
Everything from doing the analysis
and getting the results to publishing
your data and getting your grants.
So we're just really pleased
to see this market bloom,
and I encourage all of you to go
out and create great applications
so we continue to bloom.
Couple of contacts,
people you can get in touch with.
The people who presented
today will be probably milling
around here for a little bit.
I think there's a presentation.
We'll have a presentation
right after this,
but we probably have a few minutes
that you can come up and get in
touch and exchange cards with people.
So with that,
I want to thank you very much,
and see you again next year.